---
layout: post
title: Middlemarch by George Eliot
cover-img: "/assets/img/middlemarch.jpg"
tags: great-books
---

We often - knowingly or not – imagine ourselves to be worthy of luck and good fortune. We expect of the universe to recognize us as uniquely deserving of its good graces, and place the right events in our way the very moment we need them. Any reasonable person would understand that the world is not monocausal, and critics would criticize a plot that hoists its hero beyond the bounds of arbitrary luck. *Middlemarch* does not warrant those criticisms. In fact, it does the complete opposite: when the universe grants its heroes anything, it also makes them pay for it. 

*Middlemarch* is – very intentionally – a paradigmatic story of elements beyond control blocking the way of greatness, whether it be a public or a private one. Its most (and least) virtuous characters have all picked thorny roses, and made decisions that kept them from receiving adulation. The very qualities they were endowed with turned out to be liabilities, putting them in the way of the wrong people and often earning them disrepute. They were unfortunate enough to have been given exceptional gifts that eventually made them difficult for their people to understand. The more virtuous characters all had enough self-esteem to ignore the reproach of their neighbors, but the loss of others’ esteem was certainly undeserved. Had Lydgate and Dorothea played more whist, they would’ve gained more respect. 

Throughout the novel, the reader can explore the disparities between the public and the private self. Lydgate thinks of himself as honest and upright, while others think he’s showy and arrogant. Bulstrode thinks he’s righteous, while others think he’s a quack and eventually a corrupt man.  Brooke thinks he’s a man of thought, while his tenants clearly see his lack of acumen. Most importantly, most in *Middlemarch* thought of Dorothea as wonderful in every possible way, except Dorothea herself. There’s an acute difference in how the characters evaluate their own ideals and how society does. 

Middlemarch is the perfect location for the story of great projects being torn down before maturity. Word traveled fast thanks to the web of people who enjoy gossiping, and everyone was aware of the complex social network that the English town had. Rural England is certainly as good as place as any for this sort of study: there are porous and nuanced social and economic classes with many interactions between their members. It also also possesses the social dynamics that would prevent a Dorothea from becoming a St. Teresa, which George Eliot certainly wanted to illustrated. Great souls have always existed among us, but they could be smothered if not well situated – and they were indeed in the stagnation of a place like Middlemarch. 

Middlemarch is also what eventually kept Dorothea from being deemed a truly great woman, and Lydgate could only find himself successful after leaving it. Ultimately, heroism as seen by Eliot is a social and public notion completely independent from the greatness of a soul: Dorothea is far better a person than most of us could hope to be, and yet she couldn’t achieve the memorability of the Dorotheas that came before her. St. Teresa and Antigone lived in different – and certainly more heroic - times , which would’ve allowed Dorothea to achieve the greatness she was otherwise destined for. 

However, understanding the world in terms of legacy was not what Eliot deemed good in Middlemarch. If anything, Bulstrode’s thirst for respectability and good reputation eventually led to his downfall once his past was revealed. He died with a sullied name after choosing to spend most of his morally compromised life maintaining it, because the universe chose for the truth to come out when it did. Dorothea chose to do the opposite: she lost her reputation to gain herself, while Bullstrode chose to keep it but lost himself. 

Middlemarch is ultimately about image: what do we see beyond our reflection in the mirror? How different is our public image from our private image? What are the moral and mental implications of maintaining either? I believe the most important question is: does our culture encourage us to become truly great people? We want to think that we see ourselves as self-determined and capable of being great all on our own, but social forces always loom close. The scepter of reputation constantly draws near with a brush. Often times, we let it hold our hand as we attempt to paint ourselves. 