---
layout: post
title: Beyond the hamster wheel
---

After buying my first fitness tracker in 2017, I subscribed to the manufacturer’s emails, which comprise of weekly updates about how much I've exercised, the state of my fitness tracker's battery, and occasional product promotions. I usually dismiss the missives as spam I was willing to receive, on the off-chance that the mail servers send me something particularly insightful. 

There was an exception to my general apathy towards Fitbit emails: accomplishment badge notifications. Each badge is given after a certain distance is accrued during a Fitbit user's account lifetime. The distance badges range from “Marathon” (26 miles) to "Pole to Pole" (12,430 miles). I usually feel a small tingle of satisfaction whenever I receive a new badge: I have lived and moved despite the many other things I also had to do. These milestones were particularly edifying three years ago when I started exercising - they all meant that I was exceeding the expectations I set myself as a teenager. 

Yesterday, I received the "Great Wall" badge, which meant Fitbit measured 5,500 miles of distance taken since joining them. However, getting the badge didn't provide the dopamine its predecessors did. I started wondering why my mind classified the announcement as routine Fitbit spam. Why is it that there's nothing novel about the distance? 5,500 miles passed is no small feat. 

After some reflection, I realized that the email felt banal because it was indeed banal. Exercising stopped being an exceptional task: I have exercised with enough repetition that it became a routine part of my day. This class accomplishment became something I expected of myself in a normal capacity. It means I became the sort of person who exercises often, and many measurable metrics point towards that: very low heart rate, decent body fat percentage, good stamina in various exercises. It also insinuates that the standards I set myself are different now. There and then, I realized that I will find no more satisfaction in those Fitbit emails. The badges are easily measurable indicators of progress, but the true reward is the acquisition of virtue. It doesn't mean that I will dissociate myself from anything that features reward structures, or that the concept of milestones is completely void. Rather, it has to do with finding satisfaction in different goals, in addition to not seeking goals for the satisfaction their fulfillment provides. 

The stricter exercise regimen that led to the badge was part of a recent diet plan, which I also considered unexceptional since I internalized as part of maintaining a healthy weight. Regimenting my eating was difficult at the beginning, but it became manageable after about four days, as opposed to my previous - seemingly unsurmountable - attempts at dieting, the last of which fortunately ended in resounding success. I concluded from that experience that my appetites and wants have become those of a normal person as opposed to the disordered ones I had about 3 years ago. I am grateful that I learned to manage sloth and gluttony, but there are other vices I should be aware of. I faced the hydra and slain two of its heads, but I still have five to go. 

Where will I go after stepping out of the hamster wheel? I think I know. 