---
layout: post
title: Macintyre and Hugo on person and nation
cover-img: "/assets/img/les-miserables.jpg"
tags: great-books
---
Victor Hugo had more than one story to tell in *Les Misérables*. The thousand-plus pages can be read as a historical-fiction account of post-revolutionary France, a biography of Jean Valjean, or more abstractly - like Charles Baudelaire did - as a work on the virtue of charity. Because I’m a Christian who has read and loved MacIntyre’s *After Virtue*, I read it as a study in characterization closely related to a nation’s history. 

Hugo gave his characters a dignity usually given to real people: he accounted for their inner lives so comprehensively that he ensouled them. He didn’t stop at giving them personalities, he went as far as substantiating their purpose, and saw them the way they would see themselves. Hugo will spill as much ink as he needs to tell us who they are and what makes them specific and unique if he thinks they have something to offer. Most importantly, his characters are intense: they are very distilled to the point of representing not only themselves, but also whole classes of people. Many of the morally significant characters were the perfect embodiment of their archetype, like the good Christian (the Bishop), the fraud (Thénardier), and the idealist (Marius). 

Javert - who represented justice without mercy – is the center of narrative arc that reveals Hugo’s understanding of the individual. Javert's sense of justice became so pure that it blinded his other judgement, especially in his interactions with Jean Valjean. The officer’s abiding duty to the law led him to first intentionally ignore Valjean’s mercy, then revolt against it after it conflicted with his own (unmoderated) view of justice. Javert was married to the law, which explicitly paralleled the institutional marriage of a priest and the Church: any crime he committed would’ve amounted to adultery. By letting Valjean go, he betrayed himself and France, and therefore gave himself the death penalty. 

Hugo, then, had a particular interest in drawing consistent characters. They all had their own stories and their own inner lives, but they all had an unbreakable sense of self. Hugo shared with MacIntyre the idea of the unity of a person: everyone possesses a set of virtues that defines their actions in subtle but coherent ways. In Chapter 15 of *After Virtue*, he said: “Personal identity is just that identity presupposed by the unity of the character which the unity of a narrative requires. Without such unity there would not be subjects of whom stories could be told”. Hugo understood that the only worthwhile characters to have in a narrative are consistent and developed ones; they retained their original selves even when they grew and evolved. Marius, for example, changed his politics throughout the book, but still maintained a faithful idealism now directed elsewhere.  

Hugo’s saga often relied on history and sociology to frame the story and provide context and setting. The beginning of every book usually started with some sort of historical event or social phenomenon that helped explain its characters' behavior. Hugo dedicated about two dozen pages to delve into both the history and human meaning of slang (argot) before allowing any of his characters to liberally use it. This in-depth setting even extended to the Parisian sewers, which, to Hugo, were as historical (and relevant) as any other aspect of human history. The sewers don’t only move sewage, they tell the story of Lutetia progressing into Paris, with the usual historical progress that Hugo wanted to describe throughout the book. To Hugo, no single human institution is irrelevant to human behavior; *Les Misérables* is as much about France and its institutions as it is about its people. Macintyre thought the same, as he understood every action as dependent on human history and context. They both saw actions separated from history and context as unintelligible, and the only way to make them meaningful is to tie them to their progenitors. 

No single character Hugo’s story would have become who they were without being born in revolutionary France. *Les Misérables* was so long because Hugo knew that a rich universe is the one atmosphere that can make human action more meaningful. Marius’ self-understanding changed when his understanding of history changed: when he disavowed royalism for Napoleonism, his values also changed. The contrast between him and his grandfather reflected the change in values and virtues that the old and new generation possessed – that difference being largely defined by the French Revolution. Hugo’s historical vision was cognizant of the effects of culture on character, to the point of distinguishing different versions of virtues as defined differently before and after the revolution. Once touched by progress, young men became preoccupied with different notions of justice and fairness, and different understandings of virtue and goodness. It is not that they stopped possessing virtues; Hugo thought they simply reconfigured those of their fathers. MacIntyre understood this action of Progress as enlightenment when he specifically cited de Condorcet – very much an intellectual historian – as an enlightenment figure. 

While Hugo is also an enlightenment man sympathetic to the French revolution, he positively read the qualities of post-enlightenment virtues in the way a pre-enlightenment figure would’ve. He knew that there is no way to dissociate human action from its history, and he was faithful in that understanding. In that spirit, he strived to give historical context, which was the only way the characters could be intelligible to themselves and to the reader. Hugo’s narrative vision is congruent with MacIntyre’s historical vision because Hugo set to carefully place the characters and their place and time. That was the only way he made them who they are with the thoughts and aspirations they did. 

*Les Misérables* is then a perfect MacIntyrean novel. It links history and context to the virtues and vices of richly developed, self-consistent and unified characters. It describes the role of a country’s trajectory in the making of its people, and never fails in providing the historical background of why people say and think what they do. A question like “why do they speak in slang?” is answered with “how did slang come to develop?”, much like “why does one steal from the bodies of dead soldiers?” is answered with “how do poverty and listlessness make wicked people?”. We are defined by the culture we grew up in, and the very notions of virtues we possess came from a complex and patterned institutional history. Works like *Les Misérables* help us understand that every single thing we do comes with a baggage that started accumulating millennia ago. 