---
layout: post
title: Albert Camus - The Stranger
cover-img: "/assets/img/stranger.jpg"
tags: great-books
---

*The Stranger* has a strong and sever sense of style: its sentences are short and mostly declarative, its repetition studied and controlled (*ça revient au même*, *naturellement*, and *j’étais fatigué*), and its cadence steady, even at the climaxes. It does not dare to take you by the hand – it simply nudges you towards the sun, the sea, the cell and finally the execution chamber. It is a long walk in the desert, with the sun blinding the reader in its sublime clarity. Camus does not want to excite the reader, instead, he wants to push him in the sunlight. 

Its personality is of course Meursault’s, who is the narrator. Yet, there’s so much more than the method of the narration: it's the consistent personality of someone who claims not to have one. Meursault is a character often seen today: he is aloof, unassertive and tragically insensitive. He possesses a soul that people concluded absent instead of transparent, because he caused them so much anguish and discomfort. It is not to say that Meursault is to be admired – rather, he is to be respected. People of his disposition might partake in manufacturing emotion to meet social expectations. 

Meursault was always as much of an observer of his own life as we are. He never took any action of his own and was unquestioning in being led by others – mostly because he thought it was all the same. There is one event in the book in which Meursault held his agency, and it is unsurprising that this very event led to his inevitable demise. He was faithfully indifferent to the point of consistently ignoring every slight preference he had. Whenever he thought fondly of Marie, he immediately tossed the memory away as ephemeral. People would think rejecting small joys as frivolous to be unhealthy, but that would reveal the tension between truth and pleasure. 

I do not think we are meant to pity Meursault, for he was free even in captivity. He would even say the same, which is essentially what he said to the priest as his own death was nearing. Nor are we meant to pity anyone else in the novel, as Camus is broadly sympathetic to all his characters, who are all more conventional. Meursault (and perhaps Camus by extension) did not despise society as much as he felt indifferent to it, and that makes for a very different sort of critique. The indictment here is not that society punishes action, but that it equally punishes inaction even if justified: this very point was made explicitly by Meursault’s defense lawyer in the court scene. Inaction has been discussed by all sorts of theorists, from the Thomists to Arendt, and The Stranger is a book about inaction and its merits.  

There might be a tension between existentialism and inaction, as action is one of the ways humans shape themselves and their inner lives. How could one grow without doing? A lot of it has to do with discerning what to do and when to do it. It is not about giving up on action per se, but giving up on actions that accomplish nothing. 

*The Stranger* forces the reader to reconsider the necessity of their own action. It might lead some to anguish and despair, but remember: Meursault (and Sisyphus) are both free, and there’s nothing we can do about it because such freedom is internal. There’s no need to let ourselves be taken by the sea and drown, but we should at least get close enough to the water so that the waves occasionally hit our feet. Natural phenomena are powerful and potent way to contrast the acts of man with those of the forces that surround him. The book of Ecclesiastes - part of the existential canon - states: 

The sun rises and the sun sets, 
    and hurries back to where it rises. 
The wind blows to the south 
    and turns to the north; 
round and round it goes, 
    ever returning on its course. 
All streams flow into the sea, 
    yet the sea is never full. 
To the place the streams come from, 
    there they return again. 

No matter what anyone does, the world will still turn and the waves will still break on the shore. The easiest reaction to works like The Stranger and Ecclesiastes is despair, because inaction is not intuitive.