---
layout: post
title: The life of St. Teresa of Avila by herself
cover-img: "/assets/img/st-teresa.jpg"
tags: great-books
---

I ordered a used copy of St. Teresa’s autobiography, and the previous reader had left some notes in it. Reading them was really interesting: I was eavesdropping on someone else’s dramatically different insights, which helped me better come up with mine. The previous owner wrote notes through the first third of the book, but eventually stopped doing so. They themselves were mostly questions revealing a difficulty in understanding St. Teresa’s disposition, especially her sense of shame. A particularly memorable comment was “what are her sons?”, in response to one of her many self-damning lines. We can safely assume she didn’t do much, but was admonishing herself the way saints often do. 

*The Life* can only be taken seriously if written by a saint. Readers of the mystics have very stringent requirements of their writers: writers can only discuss their own virtue, if they possess a robust self-understanding. The book’s remarkable feat is the constant balancing of one’s virtue and vice: every page discussing her mystical visions is accompanied by a disclaimer of her own wickedness. It doesn’t shy away from personal sin and difficulty. It is written by someone who has proper self-love, which can be seen as an understanding of one’s own sinfulness while still being God’s creation.  

There’s something striking about the adjectives St. Teresa uses when describing people, especially people she liked or respected. She was always generous in when discussing other people, but very much less so towards herself. The chapters that did not discuss her prayer life were often about her interaction with the various people she met on her journey. She never failed to admire people she thought holy, and often morally situated them above herself. It would be safe to assume that she tried to emulated some of the people she took to, and kept corresponding with them. 

St. Teresa couldn’t have been who she was without the company she kept. She was born in medieval Spain to devout parents, and grew up around dozens of priests and religious before joining a convent whose inhabitants mostly shared her values. She was continuously surrounded by good Christian people and constantly strived to keep it so. She herself brings up the necessity of good company throughout the book: mentioning the need for good childhood friends and spiritual directors. She lived in religious community possibly for that reason, and despite being exceptional, still relied on the help of people she held in high esteem. 

While her visions were uniquely hers, they came to her after years of being surrounded by other religiously virtuous persons. She credits many of her triumphs to friends and acquaintances, from wanting sainthood to her brother to founding a monastery to her friend. There is an undeniable sense of good circumstance in the book: she lived at the right time in the right place. St Teresa’s many friends sharpened her iron because she had a keen awareness that only a good blacksmith could remove the rust. 

There are very few things less valuable for Christians than companionship. Being near a friend allows for the possibility of a form of communion. A friendly conversation allows a set of eyes to look into ours, and perhaps see us the way God sees us – with an affection and respect we often deprive ourselves of. It is often felt in a confession in which the priest – as Christ – gives us a good penance. 