---
layout: post
title: Silk That Pierced the Armor
cover-img: "/assets/img/basilica.jpeg"
---
I was alone on a Saturday night when I found myself in want of a virtue I assumed I had: I thought myself mature enough not look back at my final undergraduate semester. I wanted a piece of chalk to map a a Venn diagram representing my social life in 2020: many formal and informal associations intersected around my name and encompassed most forms of human activity. Despite unceremoniously graduating nine months ago, some of these associations are still very dear to me today. 

I joined the Notre Dame Liturgical Choir very late in my college career and yet found myself more attached to it than many of its members were. I originally planned to be moderately involved with a cool detachment that signals both involvement and business as I was doing Other Important Things. However, the more group dinners I had with the choir, the more I understood that it had something I unknowingly craved for years. 

Our rehearsals together were religious inasmuch as we prayed before after and during, but they were also religious in a deeper sense. Thrice a week I had the privilege of forgetting myself and uniting my pulse with that of others in singing the best music Christianity could offer. On Sunday mornings, all our voices were woven into a cloth that enveloped the Basilica’s gilded pillars and the Murdy’s tin pipes. The fabric was a rough felt when enough of us were hungover, but it all became velvet once our breathing patterns matched and threads tightly locked. During particularly good renditions, I felt my skin crawl. I greeted those shivers with a deep suspicion: I spent years resisting attachment, fearing appreciation would turn into sentimentality, but the blue robes we wore were heavier than any armor I could put on. I was well acquainted with splendor but always kept a respectful distance: I appreciated beauty when I sensed it but didn’t think much of it after writing the report. 

I quickly learned that participating in art demanded a generosity that went beyond offering time and talent. I shared more than just sheets and binders with my peers: these other selves had similar levels of religiosity, many of us liked the same books, and some of us were even in the same classes. I always had friends, but never like this: these partnerships went beyond the usual intimacies of knowing someone’s personal or professional life. 

2021 has been a series of attempts at replicating the small and large thrills of being in the choir. I joined other choirs, but none of them were quite like the Liturgical Choir. Some of them sung similar music, others had similar numbers, but it was impossible for them to be what I desired them to be. It is unfair of me to ask a community to cater to my wants, so I decided to think more about the reasons I can’t disengage as easily as I’d like, because it clearly wasn’t just the music.  

My pride often tricks me into looking at the graces of loyalty and nostalgia with suspicion. I told myself I was familiar with moving on and away, that I cannot dwell on the previous strings that tied me to others lest they strangle me as I exit. I tend to dismiss nobler feelings as sentimentalies I was proud to be immune from, but a life-changing experience penetrated the many layers of irony I built around myself. In the wake of the pandemic, I thought I benefited from this detachment as it allowed me to deracinate myself once again, but there might’ve been better ways to do what I did. Does the human experience involve the risky task of sharing parts of your soul? Yes. Is it worth it? Nine months ago, I would’ve said It wasn’t. 